README.md, before:

What is This
============

This is a GNU Makefile aimed to work with Git repositories consisting
of multiple branches.


Motivation
----------

It is quite common in my experience to have a Git repository where
every branch is dedicated to things that are not related to each other.
Typically this repo has nothing in the `master` and most files are placed
in some branch. Examples are:

* the repo with Dockerfiles for CI, where each branch is dedicated to a
  particular OS/distro. I.e., CentOS, Ubuntu, Fedora, etc.;
* the repo with RPM/Deb spec files -- one per (third-party) package;
* the repo with configuration files for various hosts/hardware --
  i.e., one per branch;
* etc.

As soon as the count of branches increases, it's going to be a pain to
rule them all -- e.g., to execute the same command in all branches.
To address that issue, this Makefile has appeared.

Git has a neat feature called a *working tree*. It allows having
multiple branches checked out in the file system simultaneously.
I like to name my branches as paths in a filesystem. E.g.
`release/1.2.3`, `bug/JIRA-123-blah-blah-regression`,
`feature/cool-stuff`.  Same for the mentioned types of repositories:
`config/host/ci-agent`, `centos/7`, `ubuntu/18.04`, etc.
I usually clone my repositories with the following command:

```console
~ $ git clone github:repo repo/master
```

So, the project's root resides in the `repo/master` directory after clone,
and to work with a branch, I do:

```console
repo/master$ git worktree add --checkout ../feature/cool-stuff feature/cool-stuff
```

No, I don't use these commands exactly ;-) I have pretty convenient
[Git aliases configured][1] ;-) As the result, I'll have this in my
working `repo/` directory:

    repo
    ├── feature
    │   └── cool-stuff
    └── master

For the _configuration-storage-like_ repositories with *a lot* of
branches, the `master` has this `Makefile` only (and the `README`).


Usage
-----

There is nothing to "build" in terms of Make. So, the default target
prints the help screen:

```console
demo/master$ make
Git helper to manage multiple storage branches.

Usage:
    make add-branch name=<string>
    make update-all
    make for-each-working-tree exec=<cmd> [match=<pattern>]
    make show-branches-as-tree

Extra debugging options:
 • `debug=1`        show commands instead of run
```

Examples:

* Add a new branch:
  ```console
  demo/master$ make add-branch name=hardware/laptop/system76-oryp3
  git worktree add --force --checkout -b hardware/laptop/system76-oryp3 \
  ../hardware/laptop/system76-oryp3 $(git rev-list --max-parents=0 HEAD)
  Preparing worktree (new branch 'hardware/laptop/system76-oryp3')
  HEAD is now at b07071c Demo
  ```
  In my experience, all those branches do not need a _common history_, so
  I use the very first commit in the repo as a branch point. That is why
  better not to have many files in the repo at the very first commit ;-)

* Check the result:
  ```console
  demo/master$ make show-branches-as-tree
  .
  ├── config
  │   └── host
  │       └── my.vpn
  ├── feature
  │   └── demo
  ├── hardware
  │   └── laptop
  │       └── system76-oryp3
  └── master
  ```

* The `for-each-working-tree` can be used to execute arbitrary commands
  within the working trees:
  ```console
  demo/master$ make for-each-working-tree exec='git status'

  ---[ config/host/my.vpn ] ---
  On branch config/host/my.vpn
  nothing to commit, working tree clean

  ---[ feature/demo ] ---
  On branch feature/demo
  nothing to commit, working tree clean

  ---[ hardware/laptop/system76-oryp3 ] ---
  On branch hardware/laptop/system76-oryp3
  nothing to commit, working tree clean
  ```

  One can use `match=<regex>` parameter to perform the command only for
  sub-set of branches (working trees).

* Finally, as one may guess, the `update-all` target would add work trees
  for all branches currently missed in the filesystem.

[1]: https://github.com/zaufi/etc-files/blob/hardware/notebook/System76-OryxPro/gitconfig#L5

Commit message:

docs: add help screen sample

README.md, after:

What is This
============

This is a GNU Makefile aimed to work with Git repositories consisting
of multiple branches.


Motivation
----------

It is pretty common in my experience to have a Git repository where
every branch is dedicated to things that are not related to each other.
Typically this repo has nothing in the `master` and most files are placed
in some branch. Examples are:

* the repo with Dockerfiles for CI, where each branch is dedicated to a
  particular OS/distro. I.e., CentOS, Ubuntu, Fedora, etc.;
* the repo with RPM/Deb spec files -- one per (third-party) package;
* the repo with configuration files for various hosts/hardware --
  i.e., one per branch;
* etc.

As soon as the count of branches increases, it's going to be a pain to
rule them all -- e.g., to execute the same command in all branches.
To address that issue, this Makefile has appeared.

Git has a neat feature called a *working tree*. It allows having
multiple branches checked out in the file system simultaneously.
I like to name my branches as paths in a filesystem. E.g.
`release/1.2.3`, `bug/JIRA-123-blah-blah-regression`,
`feature/cool-stuff`.  Same for the mentioned types of repositories:
`config/host/ci-agent`, `centos/7`, `ubuntu/18.04`, etc.
I usually clone my repositories with the following command:

```console
~ $ git clone github:repo repo/master
```

So, the project's root resides in the `repo/master` directory after cloning,
and to work with a branch, I do the following:

```console
repo/master$ git worktree add --checkout ../feature/cool-stuff feature/cool-stuff
```

No, I don't use these commands exactly ;-) I have pretty convenient
[Git aliases configured][1] ;-) As the result, I'll have this in my
working `repo/` directory:

    repo
    ├── feature
    │   └── cool-stuff
    └── master

For the _configuration-storage-like_ repositories with *a lot* of
branches, the `master` has this `Makefile` only (and the `README`).


Usage
-----

There is nothing to "build" in terms of Make. So, the default target
prints the help screen:

![Help Screen](help-screen.png)

Examples:

* Add a new branch:
  ```console
  demo/master$ make add-branch name=hardware/laptop/system76-oryp3
  git worktree add --force --checkout -b hardware/laptop/system76-oryp3 \
  ../hardware/laptop/system76-oryp3 $(git rev-list --max-parents=0 HEAD)
  Preparing worktree (new branch 'hardware/laptop/system76-oryp3')
  HEAD is now at b07071c Demo
  ```
  In my experience, all those branches do not need a _common history_, so
  I use the very first commit in the repo as a branch point. That is why
  better not to have many files in the repo at the very first commit ;-)

* Check the result:
  ```console
  demo/master$ make show-branches-as-tree
  .
  ├── config
  │   └── host
  │       └── my.vpn
  ├── feature
  │   └── demo
  ├── hardware
  │   └── laptop
  │       └── system76-oryp3
  └── master
  ```

* The `for-each-working-tree` can be used to execute arbitrary commands
  within the working trees:
  ```console
  demo/master$ make for-each-working-tree exec='git status'

  ---[ config/host/my.vpn ] ---
  On branch config/host/my.vpn
  nothing to commit, working tree clean

  ---[ feature/demo ] ---
  On branch feature/demo
  nothing to commit, working tree clean

  ---[ hardware/laptop/system76-oryp3 ] ---
  On branch hardware/laptop/system76-oryp3
  nothing to commit, working tree clean
  ```

  One can use `match=<regex>` parameter to perform the command only for
  sub-set of branches (working trees).

* Finally, as one may guess, the `update-all` target would add work trees
  for all branches currently missed in the filesystem.

[1]: https://github.com/zaufi/etc-files/blob/hardware/notebook/System76-OryxPro/gitconfig#L5
